[DOCS-3208] Otel rework (#13575)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/setup_overview/open_standards/otlp_ingest_in_the_agent.md

---
title: OTLP Trace Ingestion by the Datadog Agent
kind: documentation
description: 'Ingest OTLP trace data through the Datadog Agent'
further_reading:
aliases:
---

> OTLP Ingest in the Agent is a way to send telemetry data directly from [OpenTelemetry SDKs][1] to Datadog Agent. Since versions 6.32.0 and 7.32.0, the Datadog Agent can ingest OTLP traces and [OTLP metrics][2] through gRPC or HTTP.

Reviewer: directly from applications instrumented with

> OTLP Ingest in the Agent is a way to send telemetry data directly from [OpenTelemetry SDKs][1] to Datadog Agent. Since versions 6.32.0 and 7.32.0, the Datadog Agent can ingest OTLP traces and [OTLP metrics][2] through gRPC or HTTP.

Reviewer: directly from applications instrumented with

> OTLP Ingest in the Agent is a way to send telemetry data directly from [OpenTelemetry SDKs][1] to Datadog Agent. Since versions 6.32.0 and 7.32.0, the Datadog Agent can ingest OTLP traces and [OTLP metrics][2] through gRPC or HTTP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OTLP Ingest in the Agent is a way to send telemetry data directly from applications instrumented with [OpenTelemetry SDKs][1] to Datadog Agent. Since versions 6.32.0 and 7.32.0, the Datadog Agent can ingest OTLP traces and [OTLP metrics][2] through gRPC or HTTP.
```

OTLP Ingest in the Agent allows you to use trace observability features in the Datadog Agent. Because the application is instrumented with OpenTelemetry SDK, some Datadog Tracing Library specific features aren't available for the ingested data including Application Security, Continuous Profiler, Runtime Metrics, and Ingestion Rules.

> <div class="alert alert-warning">OpenTelemetry Metrics ingestion is in beta and its behavior and configuration may change.</div>

Reviewer 3: I think OTLP here is slightly more accurate

```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-warning">OTLP Metrics ingestion is in beta and its behavior and configuration may change.</div>
```

Also, could we add the same banner on https://docs.datadoghq.com/metrics/otlp/ for consistency?

> To get started, you first [instrument your application][3] with OpenTelemetry SDKs. Then, export the telemetry data in OTLP format to the Datadog Agent. Configuring this varies depending on the kind of infrastructure your service is deployed on, as described on this below. 

Reviewer: as described on this page below.

> To get started, you first [instrument your application][3] with OpenTelemetry SDKs. Then, export the telemetry data in OTLP format to the Datadog Agent. Configuring this varies depending on the kind of infrastructure your service is deployed on, as described on this below. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started, you first [instrument your application][3] with OpenTelemetry SDKs. Then, export the telemetry data in OTLP format to the Datadog Agent. Configuring this varies depending on the kind of infrastructure your service is deployed on, as described on the page below.
```

Read the OpenTelemetry instrumentation documentation to understand how to point your instrumentation to the Agent. The `receiver` section described below follows the [OpenTelemetry Collector OTLP receiver configuration schema][4].

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Host" %}}

OTLP ingestion is off by default, and you can turn it on by updating your `datadog.yaml` file configuration or by setting environment variables. The following `datadog.yaml` configurations enable endpoints on the default ports. 

For gRPC, default port 4317:

```yaml
otlp_config:
  receiver:
    protocols:
      grpc:
```
For HTTP, default port 4318:

```yaml
otlp_config:
  receiver:
    protocols:
      http:
```

Alternatively, configure the endpoints by providing the port through the environment variables:

- For gRPC (`0.0.0.0:4317`): `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_GRPC_ENDPOINT` 
- For HTTP (`0.0.0.0:4318`): `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT`

These must be passed to both the core Agent and trace Agent if they are running in separate containers.

Configure either gRPC or HTTP for this feature. Here is [an example application that shows configuration for both][1].

> <div class="alert alert-warning"><strong>Deprecation Notice</strong>: The use of `experimental:` for configuring OTLP receiving in `datadog.yaml` and the corresponding environment variables `DD_OTLP_HTTP_PORT` and `DD_OTLP_GRPC_PORT` is now deprecated and will be removed in Agent version `7.37.0`.</div>

Reviewer: following configuration:

1 experimental:
2   otlp:
3     receiver:
4       protocols:
5         grpc:
6         http:

  
2. For the Datadog Agent container, set the following endpoint environment variables and expose the corresponding port: 
   - For gPRC: `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_GRPC_ENDPOINT` and port `4317`
   - For HTTP: `DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT` and port `4318`

3. For the application container, set `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` environment variable to point to the Datadog Agent container. For example:

   ```
   OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT=http://<datadog-agent>:4318.
   ```

4. Both containers must be defined in the same bridge network, which is handled automatically if you use Docker Compose. Otherwise, follow the Docker example in [Tracing Docker Applications][2] to set up a bridge network with the correct ports.

[1]: /agent/docker/
[2]: /agent/docker/apm/#docker-network
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Kubernetes (Daemonset)" %}}

1. Follow the [Kubernetes Agent setup][1].

2. Configure the following environment variables in both the trace Agent container and the core Agent container:
   
   For gPRC:
   ```
   name: DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_GRPC_ENDPOINT # enables gRPC receiver on port 4317
   value: "0.0.0.0:4317"
   ```

   For HTTP:
   ```

>    name: DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT # enables HTTP receiver on port 55681

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   name: DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT # enables HTTP receiver on port 4318
```

>    value: "0.0.0.0:55681"

Reviewer 3: Any reason we are using `55681` here instead of `4318`?

Reviewer 4: I don't think so. I had forgot to update this in the internal doc. It's now been updated in the internal doc.

Reviewer 5: Yep, we can switch to the standard port.

   ```
   env:
    - name: <DD_AGENT_HOST>
      valueFrom:
        fieldRef:
          fieldPath: status.hostIP
    - name: OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT
      value: "http://$<DD_AGENT_HOST>:55681" # sends to HTTP receiver on port 55681
   ```

[1]: /agent/kubernetes/?tab=daemonset
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Kubernetes (Helm)" %}}

1. Follow the [Kubernetes Agent setup][1].

2. Set environment variables for the Agent. You can either use `set` commands:

   For gRPC:
   ```
   --set 'agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].containerPort=4317,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].hostPort=4317,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].name=traceportgrpc,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].protocol=TCP' 

   --set "datadog.env[0].name=DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_GRPC_ENDPOINT,datadog.env[0].value=0.0.0.0:4317"
   ```
   For HTTP:
   ```
   --set 'agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].containerPort=55681,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].hostPort=55681,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].name=traceporthttp,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].protocol=TCP'

   --set "datadog.env[0].name=DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT,datadog.env[0].value=0.0.0.0:55681"

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: @mackjmr here we have only 2 set statements for gRPC and HTTP, whereas in our doc we have 3 each. Where do we need a correction then?

For gRPC:

1--set 'agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].containerPort=4317,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].hostPort=4317,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].name=traceportgrpc,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].protocol=TCP'  
2--set "agents.containers.agent.env[0].name=DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_GRPC_ENDPOINT,agents.containers.agent.env[0].value=0.0.0.0:4317" 
3--set "agents.containers.traceAgent.env[0].name=DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_GRPC_ENDPOINT,agents.containers.traceAgent.env[0].value=0.0.0.0:4317"

and for HTTP:

1--set 'agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].containerPort=55681,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].hostPort=55681,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].name=traceporthttp,agents.containers.traceAgent.ports[0].protocol=TCP' 
2--set "agents.containers.agent.env[0].name=DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT,agents.containers.agent.env[0].value=0.0.0.0:4317"
3--set "agents.containers.traceAgent.env[0].name=DD_OTLP_CONFIG_RECEIVER_PROTOCOLS_HTTP_ENDPOINT,agents.containers.traceAgent.env[0].value=0.0.0.0:4317"

   ```

>    Or in the set them in the `datadog.env` file (a more flexible but less automated way than the `set` commands):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   Or set them in the `datadog.env` parameter of the `values.yaml` file:
```
I removed the part about "more flexible" as I believe that both methods should be equivalent, with the value in `--set` taking precendence over the value set in the user-supplied `values.yaml` file (https://helm.sh/docs/chart_template_guide/values_files/).
